# Policing in Schools: Predicting Graduation Rates on the Criminalization of Students

##### Onel Abreu, Alexander Roche, Sabrina Sedovic

## Repo Organization

## Executive Summary

  As the debate of whether police have any roles being in schools has grown over the last year, policymakers have been looking for solutions on whether police and security have a detrimental effect on student performance. Thus, our solution is to create a model that determines a schools graduation rate based on demographic, behavioral and employment data to see if we can determine if officers are influential compared to other factors.
  We focused on this concept due to the Defund the Police and Black Lives Matter Movement that occurred last summer, though issue has been brought up in Chicago Public Schools before. Police were introduced to CPS in 1991 by Mayor Richard Daley, with the intention being to protect students in neighborhoods with high crimes. Many of the schools that have chosen to keep police over the years since have been in those high crime areas, even as reports have
shown that heightened security has shown little effect in producing safer schools[3]. We, however, wanted to look at the issue through the lens of students academic success.
  Our solution was to create a model that predicts a schools overall graduation rate based on a variety of influential factors, and see how important the feature of employment of security officers , along with several other misconduct-related features, was in the final model. We hope that our model will allow for schools to make a more accurate judgment about their schools need for security officers based on other predetermined factors within the school. Now as schools must deal with low attendance and lost learning from the pandemic, they must be thorough in making decisions that focus on bringing students back to increase graduation rates. 
  The dataset used was collected through the CPS data portal and represents Chicago public high schools from 2012 to 2016, with each row representing a school in a given year. Charter schools and private schools are not included in our analysis, due to differences in the data available. For each school we gathered the following information: five year graduation rates, which will serve as our outcome variables; attendance; school demographics; employment and
behavioral data. 
  To develop our model, we used a time-series cross validation over a grid search to determine the best model to predict graduation rates. The time-series cross validation allowed us to determine the most consistent model over the years so any variance that might arise from one year, due to a policy change or other means, does not greatly hurt our model. The models we looked at included linear regressions, both on its own and using lasso, ridge and elastic net regularization, and random forest regressions. After determining the best model based on the cross-validation method, we tested the model against the final year of data to determine its effectiveness. We also explored how selecting subsets of the features helped to remove over-fitting issues and increase the effectiveness of our model.
  Our results showed that while attendance rates and percentage of students with IEPs are the most influential factors, officer/student ratio also had significant importance in our model and has a negative influence on graduation rate. Another created feature, counselor/student ratio, had a slight positive influence. Therefore, as schools begin returning to in-person learning this upcoming year, they should use these results to determine their best options for improving their graduation rates. While attendance and students with IEPs may not always be in the school’s control, the amount of security and counselors available is and should be adapted to fit the school’s needs.
